class: center, middle

# FISH 497
## Data Science for SAFS

R

https://sr320.github.io/course-fish497-2018/


Steven Roberts



---

### Last Week
--


- Explain the similarities and differences between a file and a directory.

--

- Translate an absolute path into a relative path and vice versa.

--

- Construct absolute and relative paths that identify specific files and directories.

--

- Identify the actual command, flags, and filenames in a command-line call.

--

- Demonstrate the use of tab completion, and explain its advantages.

--

- Should recognize value of bash in data QC



---

### This week
--

- R

--

- What is R? What is RStudio?



---

### Learning objectives

--

- Describe the purpose of the RStudio Script, Console, Environment, and Plots panes.

--

- Organize files and directories for a set of analyses as an R Project, and understand the purpose of the working directory.

--

- Use the built-in RStudio help interface to search for more information on R functions.

--

- Demonstrate how to provide sufficient information for troubleshooting with the R user community.

--




---

### R Studio

--

- RStudio, which is an Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for working with R.

--

- RStudio is divided into 4 “Panes”:

--

- Source for your scripts and documents (top-left, in the default layout), the R Console (bottom-left), your Environment/History (top-right), and your Files/Plots/Packages/Help/Viewer (bottom-right).





---
### Getting set up

--

- Good practice to keep a set of related data, analyses, and text self-contained in a single folder, called the working directory. All of the scripts within this folder can then use *relative paths* to files that indicate where inside the project a file is located

--
---
### Getting set up - "Projects"

- Start RStudio
- Under the File menu, click on New project, choose New directory, then New project
- Enter a name for this new folder (or “directory”), and choose a convenient location for it. This will be your working directory (e.g., ~/week3)
- Click on Create project
- Download the [code handout](http://www.datacarpentry.org/R-ecology-lesson/code-handout.R), place it in your working directory and rename it (e.g.,  data-carpentry-script.R).
- Under the Files tab on the right of the screen, click on New Folder and create a folder named data within your newly created working directory (e.g., ~/data-carpentry/data)

---

### Organizing your working directory

- *data/* Use this folder to store your raw data and intermediate datasets you may create for the need of a particular analysis. For the sake of transparency and provenance, you should always keep a copy of your raw data accessible and do as much of your data cleanup and preprocessing programmatically (i.e., with scripts, rather than manually) as possible. Separating raw data from processed data is also a good idea. For example, you could have files  data/raw/tree_survey.plot1.txt and ...plot2.txt kept separate from a  data/processed/tree.survey.csv file generated by the  scripts/01.preprocess.tree_survey.R script.
- *documents/* This would be a place to keep outlines, drafts, and other text.
- *scripts/* This would be the location to keep your R scripts for different analyses or plotting



---

### More Key Points

`whoami` shows the user’s current identity.

`/` on its own is the root directory of the whole file system.

A relative path specifies a location starting from the current location.

An absolute path specifies a location from the root of the file system.

Directory names in a path are separated with `/` on Unix, but `\\` on Windows.

`..` means ‘the directory above the current one’; `.` on its own means ‘the current directory’.

Most files’ names are `something.extension`. The extension isn’t required, and doesn’t guarantee anything, but is normally used to indicate the type of data in the file.

---



### End of this week

--

- Thursday AM - Summary Sheet

--

- Assignment completed (based on readings and exercises)

--

- Computer set-up with R




---
